[blog] Making customizable components (#33183)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/making-customizable-components.md

---
title: 'Making customizable components'
description: The use case of the data grid
date: 2022-06-23T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['alexfauquette']
tags: ['MUI X']
---

At MUI, our goal is to empower as many people as possible to build great UIs.
To do so, we build React components and documentation used by hundreds of thousands of developers on everything from minor side projects to massive company websites.

This variety of users presents a dilemma: hobbyists working on side projects want fully built components that work right out of the box, so they can focus on the application logic; many larger companies, by contrast, want to be able to fully customize components to respect their brand design.
Managing these contradictory needs becomes harder as component complexity increases.

This article reviews several different approaches to customizing components, as well as the various tradeoffs associated with each method.
Along the way, we’ll explore how these tradeoffs ultimately led to the solution that we’ve settled on for customizing MUI components.

## Style modification

If you already use a styling library, don’t hesitate to skip this part.

> See you back in the [Logic modification section](#logic-modification)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See you back in the [Logic modification section](#logic-modification).
```

### Good old CSS

Let's start with the easiest part: modifying the style.
This will necessarily involve CSS.
Especially the notion of [specificity](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity), which says that if an element is targeted by two CSS selectors, the browser will apply the more specific one.
Most of the time it is the selector using more classes.

For example, if we look at a switch component, we have multiple subcomponents that we could expect to modify.
For each of them, we assign a specific CSS class:

> <img src="/static/blog/making-customizable-components/switchHighlighted.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 16px;" alt="Switch component with highlighted sub components" />

Reviewer: Are we sure about the `width` value? The scale isn't 1:1 it might fee a bit weird. 

```suggestion
<img src="/static/blog/making-customizable-components/switchHighlighted.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 16px;" alt="Switch component with highlighted sub components" />
```

As a side note, it would have been great to have an image with a pixel-to-device resolution of 2 😁 but we can ignore this, it only impact 1/3 of our audience, it's biased toward designers.

Notice that each element is styled using only one CSS class— the thumb style, for example, is applied with the `css-jsexje-MuiSwitch-thumb` class.
So any CSS selector that includes more than one class will override its style.

I’m not a designer, so I made an ugly switch example using only CSS.
You can play with those examples in a [codesandbox](https://codesandbox.io/s/fast-http-kv85p5?file=/src/App.js)

<img src="/static/blog/making-customizable-components/uglySwitches.png" style="width: 200px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 8px;" alt="Switch customized with CSS" />

```jsx
<Switch className="uglySwitch" />

> 

Reviewer: Maybe it would help to separate the two. It wasn't clear to me that this was CSS:

````suggestion
```

```css
````

> // two classes are more specific than the default single class selector

Reviewer: CSS comment

```suggestion
/* two classes are more specific than the default single class selector */
```

> .uglySwitch .MuiSwitch-thumb {
>  background-color: 'green';
> }
> .uglySwitch .MuiTouchRipple-root {
>  border: 'solid red 2px';
> }
> .uglySwitch .MuiSwitch-track {
>  background-color: 'orange';
>  opacity: 1;
> }

Reviewer: format

```suggestion
.uglySwitch .MuiSwitch-thumb {
  background-color: 'green';
}
.uglySwitch .MuiTouchRipple-root {
  border: 'solid red 2px';
}
.uglySwitch .MuiSwitch-track {
  background-color: 'orange';
  opacity: 1;
}
```

```

### Let JS generate the CSS

> Maybe you don’t want to spent your time switching between CSS and JS files, or write long and cluttered stylesheets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maybe you don’t want to spend your time switching between CSS and JavaScript files, or writing long and cluttered stylesheets.
```

That works well enough for a simple UI element, but what happens when the component in question has many more moving parts?

### It’s never that simple

Let’s play with a slightly more complex component: the [`DataGrid`](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/).
This component allows you to manage data by applying sorting, filtering, editing, exporting, and many other -INGs.

Consider the following feature request: And together we will try to answer an open issue I get.

:::info
[DataGrid] Sorting column options by alphabetical order

When I open the filterPanel, the input listing the names of the columns is sorted according to column position.
I would like to sort it by alphabetical order.
<img src="/static/blog/making-customizable-components/issueScreenshot.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 8px;" alt="Screen shot of the filter panel with column selector un sorted" />
:::

This request makes sense.
When you have a lot of columns, sorting them can make it easier to browse the list.
But how should we implement this kind of customization?

Adding a prop called `filterPanelColumnInputSortingStrategy` could work, but please don’t do that.
It just doesn’t scale.

> There are too many different properties that developers might need to modify.

Reviewer: Because we are in the context of a React element, so props over properties.

```suggestion
There are too many different props that developers might need to modify.
```

You will end up with API documentation so long that it will take an eternity to scroll to the end—so nobody will read it.

<img src="/static/blog/making-customizable-components/bruce.gif" style="width: 500px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 8px;" alt="Your user opening the list of props" />

Here are a few better solutions that can scale more efficiently with complex components.

### Other solutions

#### Don’t bother with components

Passing all the parameters as props of a single component does not work.
So just don’t create components.

It’s not a joke—that’s the approach of headless libraries such as react-table.

> Instead of providing working components, they only provide hooks for managing the features, and let developers build their components on top of that.

Reviewer: To make the terminology more neutral (only & that).

```suggestion
Instead of providing working components, they provide hooks for managing the features and let developers build their components on top of it.
```

This approach can scale because you can scope parameters to individual features.
The filtering hooks will only take into account parameters impacting the filtering, and so on—so you can split your code feature by feature.

But because this is a fully custom approach, it will take the most amount of work relative to all other options to construct a functional UI.
If your main priority is to get up and running quickly, then this may not be a viable solution.

#### Subdivide your components

Another approach I like is to provide subcomponents.
This is what we do for MUI Core components such as the [Menu](https://mui.com/material-ui/react-menu/).

This is also the approach used by [react-admin](https://marmelab.com/react-admin/) to provide a customizable administration interface.
Here is their quick start example.
The idea is to put the `Admin` component at the root level of the app.
It is a provider that’s responsible for managing all data fetching and passing that data back to components.

The second important component is `ListGuesser` which defines how the data should be displayed.

```jsx

> import React from 'react';

Reviewer: per https://beta.reactjs.org/apis

```suggestion
import * as React from 'react';
```

import { Admin, Resource, ListGuesser } from 'react-admin';
import simpleRestProvider from 'ra-data-simple-rest';

const dataProvider = simpleRestProvider('https://domain.tld/api');

> const App = () => (
>   <Admin dataProvider={dataProvider}>
>     <Resource name="users" list={ListGuesser} />
>   </Admin>
> );
> export default App;

Reviewer: I think that it would be better to use the convention we have to create components

```suggestion
export default function App() {
  return (
    <Admin dataProvider={dataProvider}>
      <Resource name="users" list={ListGuesser} />
    </Admin>
  );
}
```

we use this everywhere in the demos, it might make readers feel more "at home"

If you’re unhappy with the smaller components, you can replace them with custom ones, and so on.

So you start with a component that’s fully functional right out of the box, and you can rewrite any of its constituent elements as needed.

This approach has **one major advantage**: it gives you a lot of flexibility.
For example, you can easily modify the order of the components and their parent/children relationships.

This approach has also **one major drawback**:it gives you a lot of flexibility.
For example, you can easily modify the order of components in a bad way.
_The more freedom, the more bugs_.

##### Drawback example

To show you how easy it is to make a mistake using this technique, here is a personal example involving Material UI components.

I recently tried to wrap a `TextField` component in a `FormControl`, and was frustrated when it didn’t work.
But the reason why is quite simple: the `TextField` component is itself composed of an input wrapped inside of a `FormControl`, and neither TypeScript nor `console.error` messages could warn me that my rendered markup was redundant and broken.

```jsx

> <FormControl>
>   <TextField>
> </FormControl>

Reviewer: TextField already includes FormControl

```suggestion
<TextField>
```

Reviewer: my bad, rereading the content, I got it backward, to revert.

Author: I reverted it. Is it just fast reading or something is miss leading you?

Reviewer: fast reading

If you’re unhappy with the smaller components, you can replace them with custom ones, and so on.

So you start with a component that’s fully functional right out of the box, and you can rewrite any of its constituent elements as needed.

This approach has **one major advantage**: it gives you a lot of flexibility.
For example, you can easily modify the order of the components and their parent/children relationships.

This approach has also **one major drawback**:it gives you a lot of flexibility.
For example, you can easily modify the order of components in a bad way.
_The more freedom, the more bugs_.

##### Drawback example

To show you how easy it is to make a mistake using this technique, here is a personal example involving Material UI components.

I recently tried to wrap a `TextField` component in a `FormControl`, and was frustrated when it didn’t work.
But the reason why is quite simple: the `TextField` component is itself composed of an input wrapped inside of a `FormControl`, and neither TypeScript nor `console.error` messages could warn me that my rendered markup was redundant and broken.

```jsx

> <TextField>

Author: ```suggestion
<FormControl>
  <TextField>
</FormControl>
```

---
title: 'Making customizable components'
description: The use case of of data grid
date: 2022-06-23T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['alexfauquette']
tags: ['MUI X']
---

At MUI, our goal is to empower as many people as possible to build great UIs.
To do so, we build React components and documentation used by hundreds of thousands of developers on everything from minor side projects to massive company websites.

This variety of users presents a dilemma: hobbyists working on side projects want fully built components that work right out of the box, so they can focus on the application logic; many larger companies, by contrast, want to be able to fully customize components to respect their brand design.
Managing these contradictory needs becomes harder as component complexity increases.

This article reviews several different approaches to customizing components, as well as the various tradeoffs associated with each method.
Along the way, we’ll explore how these tradeoffs ultimately led to the solution that we’ve settled on for customizing MUI components.

## Style modification

If you already use a styling library, don’t hesitate to skip this part.

> See you back in Logic modification section

Author: Should we keep that.

The CSS section is a reminder about what works well. 

- Advanced users already know that part of customization very well, so they probably will want to skip this section
- Junior dev could be interested by this short introduction about style modification

### Good old CSS

Let's start with the easiest part: modifying the style.
This will necessarily involve CSS.
Especially the notion of [specificity](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity), which says that if an element is targeted by two CSS selectors, the browser will apply the more specific one.
Most of the time it is the selector using more classes.

For example, if we look at a switch component, we have multiple subcomponents that we could expect to modify.
For each of them, we assign a specific CSS class:

> <img src="/static/blog/making-customizable-components/switchHighlighted.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 16px;" alt="Switch component with highlighted sub components" />

Author: Maybe add a codesadbox to let people "play" with it

Notice that each element is styled using only one CSS class— the thumb style, for example, is applied with the `css-jsexje-MuiSwitch-thumb` class.
So any CSS selector that includes more than one class will override its style.

I’m not a designer, so I made an ugly switch example using only CSS:

<img src="/static/blog/making-customizable-components/uglySwitches.png" style="width: 200px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 8px;" alt="Switch customized with CSS" />

```jsx
<Switch className="uglySwitch" />

// two classes are more specific than the default single class selector
.uglySwitch .MuiSwitch-thumb {
 background-color: 'green';
}
.uglySwitch .MuiTouchRipple-root {
 border: 'solid red 2px';
}
.uglySwitch .MuiSwitch-track {
 background-color: 'orange';
 opacity: 1;
}
```

> ### Let JS generate the CSS

Author: This section is super short because modifying style is well explained in the doc, it does not require a blog article.

It's here to remind the reader to use JS libraries to simplify her life

Maybe you don’t want to invest too much time digging through long and cluttered stylesheets just to find the single instance where this padding or that margin is defined.
Maybe you’re sick of mindlessly adjusting hex values in a hundred different places because the designer decided that “blue” should be #29b6f6 instead of #4fc3f7.

> You maybe be don’t want to spend time writing long CSS files, spending time saying “In which file is define this f\*\*\*ing 5px padding?” or modifying all your files, because a designer decided that blue should be #29b6f6 instead of #4fc3f7.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

If you want more information on this topic, you can have a look at the [documentation](https://mui.com/material-ui/customization/how-to-customize/).

## Logic modification

Styling is not the only thing you need to customize.
You may have to modify the logic, which will have to be handled by the component itself.

### Add a prop

Consider a component that lets users rate a product.
Going from 1 to 5 stars is good.
But maybe you need to go up to 10.
To do so we can add a `max` prop and render as many stars as the value of `max`.

That works well enough for a simple UI element, but what happens when the component in question has many more moving parts?

> 
> That works well enough for a simple UI element, but what happens when the component in question has many more moving parts?

Author: ```suggestion
```

### It’s never that simple

> Let’s play with a slightly more complex component: the [`DataGrid`](link to data grid docs).

Author: ```suggestion
Let’s play with a slightly more complex component: the [`DataGrid`](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/).
```

> End of the article, you now know how to customize component

Author: Maybe their is a balance to found between jokes and teasing the next section
```suggestion

That works well enough for a simple UI element, but what happens when the component in question has many more moving parts?
```

This component allows you to manage data by applying sorting, filtering, editing, exporting, and many other -INGs.

> Consider the following feature request: And together we will try to answer an open issue I get.

Author: The idea is to let the reader feel like he is the maintainer

```suggestion
Consider the following issue we get.
```

But the reason why is quite simple: the `TextField` component is itself composed of an input wrapped inside of a `FormControl`, and neither TypeScript nor `console.error` messages could warn me that my rendered markup was redundant and broken.

```jsx
<FormControl>
  <TextField>
</FormControl>

// Equivalent to

<FormControl>
  <FormControl>
    <Label />
    <Input />
    <HelperText />
  </FormControl>
</FormControl>
```

This trade-off makes sense for react-admin, which is used for building complete websites.
Their users need complete freedom when it comes to rearranging components and introducing new components anywhere.

But MUI’s products exist at a lower level.
We focus on the building blocks, not the entire website (but we do have templates for that 😉).
So that’s not the approach we took for the `DataGrid`.

#### Keep a single component

On our side, we wanted to make it as simple as possible to add the DataGrid to your application, so we stuck with the individual component structure — e.g., to create a new data grid, all you need is `<DataGrid rows={...} columns={...} />`.

To customize this single component, we use what we call the slot strategy.

## The slot solution

> Now we are back to the original problem—let’s look at how we use slots to balance the freedom to customize with the need to avoid building from scratch.

Author: ```suggestion
Now we are back to the original problem, how to allow deep customization on a single component. Let’s look at how we use slots to balance the freedom to customize with the need to avoid building from scratch.
```

Managing these contradictory needs only becomes more difficult as component complexity increases.

This article reviews several different approaches that a developer might take to customize UI components, as well as the various tradeoffs associated with each method.
Along the way, we’ll explore how these tradeoffs ultimately led to the solution that we’ve settled on for customizing MUI components.

## Style modification

(Already sold on using style libraries? Don’t hesitate to skip this section and move on to [Logic modification](#logic-modification).)

### Good old CSS

Let's start with the easiest part: modifying the style.
This will necessarily involve CSS—especially the notion of [specificity](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity), which says that if an element is targeted by two CSS selectors, the browser will apply the more specific one.
Usually this means that the selector with more classes applied to it is more specific and therefore takes precedence.

> For example, if we look at the Material UI `Switch` component, we have multiple subcomponents that we could expect to modify.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, if we look at the MUI `Switch` component, we have multiple subcomponents that we could expect to modify.
```

Not sure

Reviewer 2: If you are talking about the `Switch` from @mui/material, we should keep Material UI :)

For each of them, we assign a specific CSS class:

<img src="/static/blog/making-customizable-components/switchHighlighted.png" style="width: 532px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 16px;" alt="Switch component with highlighted sub components" />

Notice that each element is styled using only one CSS class—the thumb style, for example, is applied with the `css-jsexje-MuiSwitch-thumb` class, so any CSS selector that includes more than one class will override its style.

I’m not a designer, so I made an ugly switch example using only CSS—

> you can play around with it in [CodeSandbox](https://codesandbox.io/s/fast-http-kv85p5?file=/src/App.js):

Author: What's the name of this element bewteen "CSS" and "you"?

Reviewer 3: That is every editor's favorite punctuation mark—[the em dash](https://www.thepunctuationguide.com/em-dash.html)! 😁

### Let JS generate the CSS

> Maybe you don't want to spent your time switching between CSS and JS filed, or write long and cluttered stylesheets.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Maybe you don’t want to spent your time switching between CSS and JS files, or write long and cluttered stylesheets.
```

If your goal is to customize the style, please don't start from scratch—use libraries to manage your CSS.
By adhering to solid class management standards, you should be able to provide styles that are easy to override.

You should add props to a component only if they impact the entire component—for example, disabling filtering impacts the whole grid, so a prop would be a viable solution here.

You should add slots to override icons, because it's common to need to replace them, so it should be easy to do.

Slots should also be added when your component is somewhat independent from the main one.
For example, a grid can exist without its filter panel, or without its toolbar.

> ## Customization is key

Author: 😍
